doc: add document for dashboards assistant (#8622)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _dashboards/dashboards-assistant/alert-insight.md

---
layout: default
title: Alert insights
parent: OpenSearch Assistant for OpenSearch Dashboards
nav_order: 1
has_children: false
---

# Alert insights

> This is an experimental feature and is not recommended for use in a production environment. For updates on the progress the feature or if you want to leave feedback, join the discussion in the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/).    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an experimental feature and is not recommended for use in a production environment. For updates on the progress of the feature or if you want to leave feedback, join the discussion on the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/).    
```

{: .warning}

> The OpenSearch Dashboards Assistant alert insights help generate alert summaries and provide log patterns based on the logs that triggered the alert.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenSearch Dashboards Assistant alert insights generate alert summaries and provide log patterns based on the logs that triggered the alert.
```

              "prompt": "You are an OpenSearch Alert Assistant to help summarize the alerts.\n Here is the detail of alert: ${parameters.context};\n The question is: ${parameters.question}."
            },
            "name": "MLModelTool",
            "type": "MLModelTool"
          }
        },
        {
          "id": "create_alert_summary_agent",
          "type": "register_agent",
          "previous_node_inputs": {
            "create_alert_summary_ml_model_tool": "tools"
          },
          "user_inputs": {
            "parameters": {},
            "type": "flow",
            "name": "Alert Summary Agent",
            "description": "this is an alert summary agent"
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

</details>

For sample agent templates, see [Flow Framework sample templates](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/tree/main/sample-templates). Note the agent ID; you'll use it in the following step.

For this example, use the templates to create the following agents: 
- An alert insights agent
- Two summary agents:
    - A basic alert summary agent
    - An agent for an alert summary that includes log patterns

>     These agents require different prompts. The prompt for the log patterns summary must include a placeholder `${parameters.topNLogPatternData}` and additional instructions to guide the LLM on using this information effectively. Note that log patterns are available only for query monitors created using OpenSearch Dashboards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    These agents require different prompts. The prompt for the log patterns summary must include a placeholder `${parameters.topNLogPatternData}` and additional instructions that guide the large language model (LLM) in using this information effectively. Note that log patterns are available only for query monitors created using OpenSearch Dashboards.
```

### Step 3: Create the root agents

> Next, create [root agents]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/automating-configurations/workflow-tutorial/#root_agent) for agents created in the previous step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, create [root agents]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/automating-configurations/workflow-tutorial/#root_agent) for the agents created in the previous step.
```

Create a root agent for the alert summary agent:

```json
POST /.plugins-ml-config/_doc/os_summary
{
  "type": "os_root_agent",
  "configuration": {
    "agent_id": "<SUMMARY_AGENT_ID>"
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

Create a root agent for the alert summary with log patterns agent:

```json
POST /.plugins-ml-config/_doc/os_summary_with_log_pattern
{
  "type": "os_root_agent",
  "configuration": {
    "agent_id": "<SUMMARY_WITH_LOG_PATTERNS_AGENT_ID>"
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

Create a root agent for the alert insights agent:

```json
POST /.plugins-ml-config/_doc/os_insight
{
  "type": "os_root_agent",
  "configuration": {
    "agent_id": "<ALERT_INSIGHTS_AGENT_ID>"
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The created `os_insight` agent provides alert insights related to OpenSearch cluster metrics. For insights about alerts unrelated to OpenSearch cluster metrics, you need to register an agent with [this template](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/blob/main/sample-templates/create-knowledge-base-alert-agent.json) and change the agent name to `KB_For_Alert_Insight`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `os_insight` agent provides alert insights related to OpenSearch cluster metrics. For insights about alerts unrelated to OpenSearch cluster metrics, you need to register an agent with [this template](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/blob/main/sample-templates/create-knowledge-base-alert-agent.json) and change the agent name to `KB_For_Alert_Insight`.
```

}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

The following table describes the Assistant Summary API parameters.

Parameter | Required/Optional | Description
:--- | :--- | :---

> `summaryType` | Required | Specifies the type of application calling this API. Use `alerts` for alert insights.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`summaryType` | Required | Specifies the type of application calling the API. Use `alerts` for alert insights.
```

> `question` | Required | Specifies the user's question regarding alert insights. Default is `Please summarize this alert, do not use any tool.` 

Reviewer: I realize this may not be changeable, but the default should read "Please summarize this alert. Do not use any tool."

`context` | Required | Provides context for the alert, including the alert monitor definition, active alerts, and trigger values.

> `index` | Optional | The index that the alert monitors. If this parameter is not provided, log pattern analysis is not returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`index` | Optional | The index monitored by the alert. If this parameter is not provided, log pattern analysis is not returned.
```

> `dsl` | Optional | The DSL query for alert monitoring. If this parameter is not provided, log pattern analysis is not returned.

Reviewer: Define DSL? query domain-specific language (DSL)

  "question": "Please provide your insight on this alerts.",
  "summary": <OUTPUT FROM ALERT SUMMARY AGENT>
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

The following table describes the Assistant Insight API parameters.

Parameter | Required/Optional | Description 
:--- | :--- | :---

> `summaryType` | Required | Specifies the type of application calling this API. Use `alerts` for alert insights.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`summaryType` | Required | Specifies the type of application calling the API. Use `alerts` for alert insights.
```

> `insightType` | Required | Defines the alert type. Use `os_insight` for cluster metrics alerts and `user_insight` for other alert types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`insightType` | Required | Defines the alert type. Use `os_insight` for cluster metric alerts and `user_insight` for other alert types.
```

> `question` | Required | Specifies the user's question regarding alert insights. Default is `Please provide your insight on this alerts.` 

Reviewer: Ideally, the default would not be grammatically incorrect.

### Step 2: Create the agents

> To orchestrate alert insights, you'll need to create the necessary [agents]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/index/#agents). Create a workflow template for creating all necessary text to visualization agents by sending the following request:

Reviewer: "text-to-visualization agents"
